---
title: "The World the Normans Made"
date: 2021-09-01T17:17:46+04:00
draft: false
noshowdate: true
noshowpager: true
---

## I. Society
*by Dylan Reddick*

The Norman conquest of Sicily and southern Italy (1060-1194) was not
accomplished by implementing a divine plan, although the leaders of
these Viking descendants believed just that. The warrior-spirited group,
who originated from Normandy, France, simply viewed the Mediterranean as
economic fodder and obtainable land to integrate as part of their
kingdom. More prominently recognized for reshaping the British Isles and
their involvement in the early Crusades, the Norman conquest that took
place in the Mediterranean is often overlooked. In its early
usurpations, the invasion of Norman mercenaries, specifically the
Hauteville kin, imposed themselves upon Italian land and caused civil
unrest and an unsure future for the region's inhabitants. Under the
reign of King Roger II (1130-1154), the Normans united people who had
ties to separate independent civilizations by establishing a kingdom and
creating a society that allowed all subjects to prosper, regardless of
the contradicting religions and cultures of the time.[^1] Sicily, which
was mostly inhabited by Greeks and Muslims during the eleventh and
twelfth centuries, became a major target for the papacy, which was
interested reclaiming the island for the Latin Church.[^2] A Christian,
Roger II invaded foreign lands with his Norman counterparts and
justified such actions through the claim of restoring what was seen as
the Church's rightful property.[^3] Reinstating a religious institution
to mostly non-Latin Christian subjects proved to be a challenging goal
for the King of Sicily, however, great efforts were made to incorporate
the local population into the developing society.[^4] The king himself
was surrounded by a diverse circle of advisors, such as Abu Abdullah
Mohammed al-Edrisi, an Arab who authored *The Book of Roger*, as well as
trusted Byzantine and Muslim subjects who served his court.[^5] The
cultural diversity within Roger's court provides insight into how Sicily
functioned as a whole under his control.

{{< figure src="image1.png" alt="Tabula Rogeriana" caption="Tabula Rogeriana - Abu Abdullah Mohammed al-Edrisi; Constructed for Roger II by his most trusted friend, council member, and geographer. Finished in 1154 just months before the demise of the king, The Tabulia Rogeriana was one of the most accurate and detailed maps of the twelfth century. Al-Edrisi also authored The Book of Roger, which became one of the most influential books of the Middle Ages." >}}

Roger II chose Palermo, formerly Muslim Sicily's capital, as his own
place of residence around 1130 and instead of forcefully ruling the
mostly Muslim population, he incorporated them into his kingdom
peacefully. The city's reputation grew and it came to be known as a
center of mathematics and sciences. Many Muslim scholars, poets, and
travelers arrived in droves in search of knowledge. The community even
established Arabic as the official language for the sciences.[^6] The
king was known for his passion for knowledge and curiosity for the
mechanics of society, and by 1140 he provided the mathematicians,
scientists, philosophers, and scholars of the world with a state
dedicated towards the preservation of intellectual discourse and
learning.[^7] With seemingly no limit to his mental capabilities, the
son of the Great Count spoke the many languages that accompanied such a
diverse island such as French, Latin, Greek, and Arabic.[^8] This
profound infatuation with learning separated Roger II from his
predecessors and successors and helped shape the island\'s reputation as
a place of immense culture. In the twelfth century, Palermo, now the
Norman capital, became synonymous with intellectual life and served as a
true representation of the multicultural society that the Normans
created.

{{< figure src="image2.png" alt="Cappella Palatina" caption="Cappella Palatina, a chapel commissioned by Roger II to be built upon a pre-existing mosque. A place of worship that incorporates the multicultural architecture styles associated with the local Byzantine and Muslim subjects of Palermo. Arabic arches, and Byzantine domes accompany each other and consist of inscriptions in Latin, Greek, and Arabic, highlighting the coexistence of a variety of cultures and religions within Norman Sicily's society." >}}

Considering that the Sicilian Normans were outnumbered by their Muslim
and Greek subjects, it was vital to the establishment of their society
that they refrain from agitating them. Roger I, who served as the count
of Sicily and Calabria before his son, is noted for employing Muslim
soldiers in his army and for providing the future king with models for
incorporating the non-Latin subjects into Norman society.[^9] Roger II
expanded on his father's methods to demonstrate tolerance towards all
cultures. Also, attempting to distance himself and his new Sicily from
the unorganized and divided political systems that plagued the island's
past, Roger II instituted new policies that respected other traditions.
The Assises of Ariano established a unified kingdom by not abolishing
pre-existing cultural practices or laws of the peoples ruled by
Normans.[^10] This series of inclusive laws was essential to the
successful functioning of Sicily's multicultural society. Not only did
this gain the respect of opposing rulers by protecting their local
customs and traditions, it encouraged a peaceful coexistence amongst his
new territories.

The Norman occupation in the Mediterranean undeniably changed the face
of Sicily and Southern Italy. By introducing the nation's first standard
form of coinage, the ducat, they encouraged a unification of Norman
territories.[^11] Usage and acceptance of such a currency supported by
the efforts of Greek Christians and Muslim Arabs provides proof of a
general approval of Norman rule by their heterogeneous subjects - one
that extended beyond Roger II's reign.[^12]

## II. Economy
*by Emily Cotugno*

Palermo was the second biggest city in the kingdom (next to Naples) and
was the center of all politics, economy, and culture.[^13] However, it
was not always this way. When Norman conqueror Robert Guiscard first
found Sicily, he described it as "torn apart." The city was often left
bankrupt at the hands of rulers who did not always take the city's best
interest into consideration.[^14] It was not until Roger II established
a well-grounded kingdom that Sicily and the city of Palermo started to
thrive. Roger II is said to have based his kingdom on "commercial
prosperity and efficient administration."[^15] With that being said, he
played a major role in commercializing the Mediterranean and building
Sicily's economy.

To start, there is evidence of a financial administration called the
*duana*. The first known dates of the *duana* date back to 1174.
However, there is a strong possibility that Roger II\'s father, Roger I,
implemented a sort of *duana* system dating back to the early 1060s. The
theory is that the *duana* consisted of 3 offices, the supervising
office, the treasury office, and the office of profits. This is
particularly interesting because this system itself is said to have
helped with the remarkable advancement of the kingdom\'s economy.[^16]
This system is relatively complex and was reworked many times as years
progressed but, in short, the system was mostly in charge of the taxes
on feudal lands. This also provides evidence of a feudal system,
although their class / economic system was not specifically titled a
"feudal system." There is brief mention of who occupied land and where.
For instance, royals would live on fiefs (or large estates) and other
inhabitants of the kingdom would live elsewhere.[^17] Different
administrative offices of the *duana* held the responsibility of taxing
various regions of the kingdom which most certainly aided the kingdom's
profits. Though Roger II was not the person who put the *duana* into
place, he certainly continued using this financial administration for
years in order to maintain a steady profit.

Moving forward to what Roger II was able to do economically for the
kingdom, when he rose to power in the early twelfth century, he decided
his first order of business was to create a new currency and appointed
commissioners to enforce the use of the monetary system.[^18] Roger II
also used Sicily's location in the Mediterranean to his advantage. For
example, he created naval "tolls\'\' in order to support his kingdom as
well as took control over the Messina Strait, which is a small body of
water connecting Sicily to the mainland.[^19] Sicily's location is by no
means isolated and is quite centralized in the Mediterranean, meaning
they had easy access to trade which alone stood as a "powerful and
aggressive economic system."[^20]

Not much more information on how Roger II helped build Sicily's economy
can be found in the surviving sources. Some information is available for
how those who reigned after Roger II either destroyed or built up
Sicily's economy. For instance, William II, who reigned for 13 years
after Roger II's death, was said to have not done much for Sicily's
economy (or the kingdom in its entirety) whatsoever. William II
"\...time and time again emptied the national coffers on enterprises
that brought him nothing but defeat and humiliation" and recklessly
spent the kingdom\'s money by trying to conquer other lands.[^21] It
does seem that others who held positions of authority within the
kingdom, such as George of Antioch, Roger II's *ammiratus ammiratorum*
(Admiral of Admirals), levied low, but effective, taxes.[^22]

All in all, it seems Norman Sicily's economy thrived the most through
taxes, tolls, and easy access to trading routes.

## III. Politics
*by Samuel Moss*

The political arena of Sicily, both before and during the Norman rule
over the country, was a constant battle of competing power struggles,
wars, and kings doing what they wanted versus what was actually
beneficial to their domain. Most of the politics of the time period was
dominated by signing treaties after wars, which always ended in the
sides either compromising on a solution to end their conflict or with
one side dominating the discussions and having more control of the other
side. Another way to strengthen political ties during this time was
arranging marriages between heirs to thrones around Europe and the
Mediterranean countries to ensure peaceful and prosperous alliances for
years to come. When famous Norman invader Robert Guiscard first landed
in Sicily, he found a Southern Italy that was being fractured by
conflicting claims of power over the region by the Pope and the Catholic
Church,, two empires, three races and an overwhelming number of smaller
power-grabbing groups, such as principalities, duchies and baronies.
This included a Sicily that had been weakened for two hundred years
under Saracen rule, where the Greek Christian minority had no power, and
local emirs continually fought for control.[^23] However, over the
course of time and history, Robert Guiscard and his descendants created
a stable society that enabled the region to flourish. Unfortunately, not
every king that Sicily had actually helped the country and there was one
who bankrupted the country multiple times with futile wars and
conflicts. He was William II, whose time as the King of Sicily saw the
resurgence of a foreign policy practice that was dangerous and
expensive: capturing foreign lands for the sake of it, without
considering the economic and political backlash that he would
receive.[^24] His was a very different approach to diplomacy and foreign
relations, one that differed significantly from that of Roger II, who
arguably had the most positive impact on the new kingdom.

Yet, even before the reign of Roger II, the planning for a successful
state had begun under Roger I, the Great Count. Normans, Italians,
Lombards, Greeks, and Saracens would all have a say in the new
government that Roger I created, with the official languages being
Arabic, Greek, Latin, and Norman French.[^25] Roger I was definitely
ahead of his time when he pursued policies of religious and cultural
tolerance. He not only allowed multiple cultures and religions to live
in harmony in his kingdom, he built some facets and practices of each
religion and culture into the government itself. Roger I laid the
groundwork for his son, Roger II, to take over and continue his work of
creating a modern-day kingdom for the time, where religious and cultural
tolerance were big factors of everyday life.

Roger II transformed Sicily into the kingdom that has been the focus of
many historians' studies. He required that the barons and leading clergy
in Southern Italy and Sicily take an oath to him, which outlined both
the political and legal systems that he wanted to employ.[^26] From the
very beginning of his rule, he wanted to make clear that he was in
charge and that no one was to question his supreme authority. One way he
did this was by promoting his political philosophy, which was modeled on
Byzantine rule.[^27] The philosophy that Roger II wanted to rule by was
total and complete power and the best way to do that was by ruling as an
absolute monarchy. Roger II governed with the idea that kings have a
divine right to rule. The monarch was King of Sicily because God wanted
him to be. If anyone questioned his supreme authority over the kingdom,
it was considered both a religious sin and a crime of treason.[^28] This
absolute monarchical political philosophy, combined with religious and
cultural tolerance and integration, was the basis for the rest of Roger
II's rule, as well as the subsequent leaders of the Norman Kingdom in
Sicily, until its unfortunate and untimely end in 1194.

Regarding the subsequent rulers after Roger II, there were four kings
who succeeded him. They were William I ('The Bad'), William II ('The
Good'), Tancred of Lecce, and William III, until the kingdom was taken
over by the German emperor in 1194. All of these kings had issues and
did not live up to the standards that Roger II set out during his time
as the King of Sicily. One problem of William I was that he was not
prepared for ruling Sicily. Given that he was not the intended heir, he
did not receive very much training in political and diplomatic
life.[^29] As discussed earlier, William II tried to capture other lands
for personal gain and, in the process, he drained the coffers of the
state, which caused a real financial issue in Sicily, especially since
his expeditions were failures and he was always defeated.[^30] By the
time of Tancred's and William III's reigns, the kingdom was too far gone
to be saved and it was easily taken over by the German emperor, Henry
VI, and his wife Constance, who was King Roger II's daughter by his
third wife, Beatrice of Rethel.

It is unfortunate that the Norman Kingdom of Sicily ended so quickly, as
the political and ideological grounds regarding religious and cultural
tolerance that it was built upon were considered revolutionary for the
time. The politics of any nation, especially a new one such as the
Kingdom of Sicily, are always on display for the world to see and take
advantage of, which is exactly what happened to the Normans in Sicily.

## IV. Law
*by Kimberly Grecco*

Norman legal administration was not fully consolidated in medieval
Sicily and southern Italy until Roger II's reign. Prior to the
establishment of a monarchy, there was some legal disconnect within
these southern regions. Some provinces followed Lombard law, while
others were under the jurisdiction of Roman law.[^31] This division,
accompanied by other conflicts, made the beginning of Roger II's reign
quite chaotic. With aspirations of peace and power, Roger II hoped to
expand on the legacy his father created and found a unified and stable
Norman kingdom under a new group of codified laws.

Although many credit Roger II with transforming the legal landscape of
Norman society, his ideas were not uniquely new. The Normans frequently
took pre-existing customs or administrations and built upon them, making
them their own. Roger's new law code, the Assizes of Ariano, were no
exception as they were modeled primarily after Roman law.[^32] That
other influences were present as well should not surprise us considering
that Sicily and southern Italy were at a crossroad of cultures. This
intersection allowed for French, Lombard, Byzantine, Islamic, and other
influences to coexist alongside Roger's new code of laws.[^33]
Coexistence was only permitted if these existing laws did not conflict
with the new assizes.[^34] This system allowed Roger to showcase his
power in two ways: he was able to enforce a new law code that was
recognized as highly developed for the time period, and was able to
display tolerance by allowing certain laws and administrations to remain
in the provinces. One way which tolerance was shown was by allowing
local officials to retain their positions in the new administration. For
example, the Norman administration included numerous Muslims as well as
Muslim converts to Christianity who acted as a bridge from the Norman
administration to the Sicilian population, which was primarily
Muslim.[^35] The Norman system of government did not only run more
efficiently with the use of local officials, their rule was also able to
gain a sense of legitimacy. The integrity of the system was maintained
while integrating the local population under the new monarchy.

{{< figure src="image3.png" alt="Depiction of Roger II being crowned by Christ himself" caption="Depiction of Roger II being crowned by Christ himself" >}}

The Assizes of Ariano was drafted by the
king in the 1140s.[^36] One of the main purposes of the assizes was to
consolidate power under the crown. In doing so, Roger's authority became
seemingly absolute. He enforced the notion that he was appointed to the
throne by God himself, and therefore he ruled through the will of God.
Although this concept legitimized his rule as a whole, it applied to the
legal realm specifically in the sense that laws were the divine will of
God and Roger acted as sole interpreter of this will.[^37] Judicial
power was not separate, but rather concentrated under the Norman
monarchy. Roger wielded the power of a king, judge, priest, etc. His
multifaceted power drove secular and religious interests to become
interconnected. The king became the one who made decisions regarding the rights and privileges of religious
officials and became seen as the defender of religion.[^38] Defying the
law not only became an offense against the crown, a treasonous crime,
but also an offense against God himself.[^39] Although power was
concentrated in Roger, other positions within the judicial system also
played an important role in enforcing the law. Magistrates and
justiciars were responsible for overseeing issues regarding criminal
law.[^40] The Curia Regis was responsible, in part, for matters of civil
law.[^41] Despite Roger's exceptional power, he had an effective
bureaucracy which helped him effectively promulgate the laws of the
kingdom.

Laws enacted under the Assizes of Ariano addressed multiple areas of
life for inhabitants of the Norman kingdom. Marriage, religion, and
offenses against the crown were some of the main issues addressed in
Roger's legislation. By analyzing the assizes themselves, one is able to
gain a better understanding of the morals and important issues of this
society at the time. As aforementioned, religion and state affairs
became indistinguishable under Roger II. This was evident in his
legislation, as several of his laws address matters of the Church.
Assize II is where Roger explicitly grants privileges to the Church and
deems the crown as the protector of the institution.[^42] Religion was
undoubtedly important to the Normans, who as a group often used religion
to legitimize themselves. Other pieces of legislation upheld civil
rights. Assize III required individuals in power to treat their subjects
with decency and only demand what is considered reasonable.[^43] Many of
the laws touch upon adultery, which appeared to be a sensitive issue.
This further alludes to the importance of religion and marriage as an
extension of the Church. Considering the assizes solidified the power of
the monarchy, offenses against the crown, such as treason, were among
the most severe offenses punishable by law.

Maintaining power was important to Roger, who used religion as a means
to an end. By promoting individual rights in his legislation, he ensured
that his power would go relatively unchallenged. Overall, Norman legal
administration, which had been developed from preexisting structures,
was among the most advanced of the time period. Power was consolidated
under the laws of the Norman monarchs, especially Roger II. This allowed
Sicily and southern Italy to transform from an unstable region into one
marked by peace and stability.

## V. Religion
*by Megan Ingwersen*

In Norman Sicily, religion was a very important aspect to culture,
politics, and society. The Normans were devout Christians. However, when
the Normans began their conquests on the island of Sicily, there were
many people who came from different religious backgrounds. For example,
one-third of the people in Sicily were Byzantine and two-thirds were
Muslim.[^44] Sicily in the times of the Normans was recorded as being
well known for their diverse and multicultural society. To add to this,
the Normans themselves have been credited with religious tolerance
towards people who were considered religious minorities, like Jews,
Eastern Orthodox Christians, and Muslims. Historians debate whether
religious tolerance was actually achieved or whether these fleeting
instances gloss over a history of violence towards religions. However,
it can be argued that Norman Sicily did achieve some level of religious
tolerance between the Norman Rulers and religious minorities.

In the early Norman conquests of Roger I in 1060, it is evident that
exchanges between the Normans and religious minorities were tolerable,
especially between the Normans and Muslims. In fact, Roger I had to
foster relationships with Arabs and Muslims of Sicily in order to
capture cities. Roger I began incorporating Muslims into his army.[^45]
Roger I did not want to conquer through battles, but rather
negotiations. They were greatly used in negotiations with other Muslim
cities.[^46] Due to this, Muslims in the cities had some level of
autonomy and Roger I gave them a sense of respect. Muslims who lived in
villages did not have the same opportunity and had pressure to convert
to Christianity instead.[^47] Roger I did not have any Muslim in the
central government; that would not happen until William I's reign. It is
speculated whether this exclusion occurred because of religious
intolerance or due to the distaste of war with Muslims and the betrayal
of Ibn al-Thumna, who was a prominent Muslim ruler who promised Roger I
a conquest of his city but betrayed Roger I before he could siege
it.[^48] What Roger I did have was a lot of Byzantines officials in the
central government, which demonstrates that the Normans allowed Greek
influence.[^49]

After Roger I's death in 1101, his son Simon was expected to become the
next count. Roger's wife, Countess Adelasia, served as regent.
Unfortunately, Simon died young and in 1105, the future Roger II became
the heir to the county. Adelasia continued to serve as regent until
1112. During the regency, the strong influence of the Byzantines was
changing to a world more heavily influenced by Muslims.[^50] During this
time, Muslim women appear to have set trends for fashion and culture.
Christian women were reportedly wearing dresses inspired by Muslim
women, speaking Arabic, and wore garments and veils on their faces.[^51]
Religious tolerance and peace was beginning to blend into Norman
Sicily's culture. However, there was little addition to the central
government. When Roger II became king, he was very keen on keeping the
same rules from before, though he did employ Muslims as scribes. In
fact, Roger II was fond of Muslims and had a circle where he and Muslims
scholars and Roger II shared ideas about science and mathematics.[^52]

What was most important to Roger II was coexistence between Normans and
Muslims in society and while Roger II did have many acquaintances with
Muslims scholars, he still did not add them to his government. What can
be said is that Roger II's era witnessed much more religious tolerance
than the preceding period -- even though it cannot be considered a total
integration of society. What followed Roger II's legacy was his son
William I who saw great changes under his leadership. William I would
have Muslims in the government for the first time, but due to his weak
reign and reoccurring revolts, violence between Christians and Muslims
kept transpiring.[^53] After William I died, his 13-year-old son,
William II, was next in line to become king. William II had deep trust
in Muslims; he allowed them to be active in the government and they also
worked as his cooks and guards.[^54]

With all this said, it should be noted that some scholars believe that
what the Normans were practicing was not so much widespread religious
tolerance but rather strategic tolerance for political purposes.[^55] It
should be noted that the violence between Christians and Muslims never
stopped and it drove Muslims and other minorities out of Sicily.
However, it can still be argued that the Normans did achieve a level of
tolerance because while violence did persist, the progression of
religious minorities in society and in culture is very evident. It would
be wrong to say that Greeks and Muslims did not influence Norman Sicily.
In fact, there are numerous sources -- documentary as well as monumental
-- that demonstrate this. Religion dominated this world and could be an
exrtremely divisive force but at times coexistence and peace prevailed.
It is extraordinary to think about how the Norman Christians and other
religious minorities, especially Muslims, were able to achieve religious
tolerance during this time and what kind of world was created because of
it.

## VI. Art and Architecture
*by Emily Cotugno*

### Architecture:

Before diving into a discussion about Norman Sicily's art and
architecture, it must be understood that religious and cultural identity
were not unified categories in the medieval Mediterranean.[^56] As
stated previously, Sicily was inhabited mostly by Eastern Orthodox
Christians and Muslims, which means the religious and cultural
differences were present. Also, geographically speaking, Sicily sits in
the middle of the Mediterranean and has been an intersection of sea
trade routes. This means the island was visited by many people of many
backgrounds.[^57] In turn, this "hybrid" of tradition, culture, and
religion made itself apparent in Norman Sicily's visual language.[^58]
Turning our attention to one of Norman Sicily's greatest works, the
Cappella Palatina, captures this hybridity perfectly.

The Cappella Palatina, located in Palermo, Italy, is the royal chapel of
the Palazzo dei Normanni (Palace of the Normans) and was constructed
under Roger II's rule. Traditionally, European Norman buildings were
designed to be dull, monochromatic, and Romanesque.[^59] However, Roger
II was known for being fascinated with the world, its varying cultures,
and different traditions.[^60] Being surrounded by people of numerous
cultures and religions, Roger II decided to design the Cappella Palatina
to represent this mixture of culture and identity while also including
traditional Roman design. It is also important to note that Norman
rulers tried to create the image that they were "Christian leaders of
diverse people."[^61] This, along with geographical location and those
who inhabited Sicily / Southern Italy could be reasons why Norman
Sicily's architecture was not built with one specific art style in mind.

As stated prior, the Cappella Palatina was culturally, religiously, and
traditionally influenced by those who inhabited the area. Being that
Sicily was mostly inhabited by Muslims and Byzantines, the Cappella
Palatina artistically contains aspects of both cultures as well as
includes some Romanesque features. This royal chapel contains Islamic
muqarnas ceilings, Byzantine mosaics that cover the walls, Roman
pillars, Roman *spolia,* or repurposed building stone, and it is
believed that walls that are now bare were once covered by Islamic
inspired tapestries.[^62] The Cappella Palatina's design inspiration
goes much further than just the inhabitants of Sicily, the design was
also inspired by surrounding countries. For example, the chapel\'s
flooring seems to have taken inspiration from Spain and North
Africa.[^63]

The Cappella Palatina tells a story through its art. Not only did its
creation allow for different cultures, traditions, and religions to come
together and allow for them to be represented in an artistic way, it
also tells Christian stories through the many mosaics.

{{< figure src="image4.png" alt="Interior of the Capella Palatina" caption="Pictured: The inside of the Cappella Palatina. Christian figures depicted from mosaics can be seen. The Islamic style dome is also present" >}}}

In addition to the Cappella Palatina, Roger II commissioned the
cathedral of Cefalù which, like the Cappella Palatina, incorporated
antique *spolia*, Byzantine mosaics, and Islamic muqarnas.[^64] However,
while the two buildings have their similarities, they also have their
differences. For instance, their functions were drastically different.
The Cappella Palatina was used as a royal chapel, contained within the
Palazzo di Normanni, and barely seen by the public. Whereas the
cathedral of Cefalù was available to the public, intended by Roger II to
be used as his burial site, and placed in a small village.[^65] The
cathedral of Cefalù has more Romanesque features and draws on western
motifs more than the Cappella Palatina does.[^66] In terms of scale, the
cathedral of Cefalù was much larger than the Cappella Palatina, with the
cathedral being 70 meters long and 27 meters wide and the Cappella
Palatina being a mere 40 by 20 meters.[^67]

{{< figure src="image5.png" alt="The Cathedral of Cefalù's Ceiling" caption="Pictured: The Cathedral of Cefalù's Ceiling (Apse Section) that also incorporate Islamic and Byzantine Motifs" >}}

Roger II commissioned other buildings during his reign, though none are
more significant than the Cappella Palatina or the Cathedral of Cefalù.
However, the buildings continued using the cultural diversity of the
land as visual inspiration for them. The churches of Santa Maria
dell'Ammiraglio (often referred to as the Martoranna) and San Giovanni
degli Eremiti both exhibit Islamic and Byzantine motifs, seeing that
both buildings have Islamic inspired domes and Byzantine inspired
mosaics.

### Art:

Not much is mentioned about Norman artwork, although one can argue
architecture and art are closely tied. However, one of the most famous
pieces of artwork from Norman culture is Roger II's coronation mantle
(which, oddly enough, does not appear to have been worn by the kind
during his coronation in 1130). A coronation mantle is a garment worn by
kings, queens, or by anyone of a higher power specifically during their
coronation; it is a symbol of authority. A mantle is also symbolic in
the sense that it is meant to be passed down from one ruler to the next
- symbolizing a transfer of power.[^68] Roger II's coronation mantle is
especially significant because it ties in the same cultural diversity as
the Cappella Palatina and the cathedral of Cefalù.\
This mantle ties in European, Muslim, and Mediterranean aspects. The
shape itself is pulled from Western European design whereas the fabric
is made from high quality red silk (which reflects the Mediterranean
aspects of textile production).[^69] It is said that the mantle itself
was most likely produced by Byzantine craftsmen and later decorated by
Muslim craftsmen.[^70]

{{< figure src="image6.png" alt="Roger II's Coronation Mantle" caption="Pictured: Roger II's Coronation Mantle. The shape resembles Western European design, whereas the fabric and detail resemble Mediterranean and Islamic design." >}}

In terms of design, the mantle is pictured to have a palm tree in the
center, with a lion attacking a camel on both sides. This is said to
represent Roger II's conquest of Muslim territories.[^71] There are also
hints of astronomical associations, such as the sun motif above the
lion\'s head, which draws inspiration from Henry II's star mantle. The
design is embroidered with gold and outlined in pearls (which can be
interpreted as stars, perhaps another astronomical inspiration).[^72]
The edges of the mantle contain Arabic inscriptions which includes a
date and an excerpt that proves royal association.[^73]

The mixture of cultures in both Norman architecture and artwork goes to
show that the implementation of cultural hybridization goes far beyond
visual design, but in production as well.

<hr>

[^1]: Lisa Reilly, *The Invention of Norman Visual Culture: Art, Politics, and Dynastic Ambition* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020), 123.

[^2]: Ibid., 126.

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Hiroshi Takayama, *Sicily and the Mediterranean in the Middle Ages* (New York: Routledge, 2019), 173.

[^6]: John Julius Norwich, *The Kingdom in the Sun: 1130-1194*, vol. II (London: Faber & Faber, 2018), 3.

[^7]: Ibid., 100.

[^8]: Ibid., 101.

[^9]: Reilly, *Invention of Norman Visual Culture,* 127.

[^10]: Takayama, *Sicily and the Mediterranean,* 173.

[^11]: Norwich, *Kingdom in the Sun,* 86.

[^12]: Ibid., 92.

[^13]: Takayama, *Sicily and the Mediterranean,* 122.

[^14]: Norwich, *Kingdom in the Sun,* 3.

[^15]: Takayama, *Sicily and the Mediterranean,* 4.

[^16]: Ibid*.,* 53.

[^17]: Ibid., 9.

[^18]: Ibid*.*, 174.

[^19]: Charles D. Stanton, *Norman Naval Operations in the Mediterranean* (Woodbridge, Eng.: Boydell, 2016), pp. 174-222.

[^20]: Takayama, *Sicily and the Mediterranean,* 52.

[^21]: Norwich, *Kingdom in the Sun,* 354.

[^22]: Ibid., 155.

[^23]: Ibid.*,* 3.

[^24]: Ibid.*,* 354.

[^25]: Ibid., 4.

[^26]: Ibid.*,* 81-82.

[^27]: Ibid., 83.

[^28]: Ibid., 83.

[^29]: Ibid.*,* 169.

[^30]: Ibid., 354.

[^31]: Graham A. Loud, *The Age of Robert Guiscard: Southern Italy and
    the Norman Conquest* (London: Routledge, 2000), 286.

[^32]: Ibid., 43.

[^33]: Ibid., 44.

[^34]: Norwich, *Kingdom in the Sun*, 82.

[^35]: Takayama, *Sicily and the Mediterranean,* 65.

[^36]: Norwich, *Kingdom in the Sun,* 82.

[^37]: Ibid., 83.

[^38]: Ibid., 84.

[^39]: Ibid., 83.

[^40]: Ibid., 99.

[^41]: Ibid., 83.

[^42]: *Roger II and the Creation of the Kingdom of Sicily*, trans. Graham A. Loud (Manchester, Eng. and New York: Manchester University Press, 2012), 315-16.

[^43]: Norwich, *Kingdom in the Sun*, 85.

[^44]: Reilly, *Invention of Norman Visual Culture,* 128.

[^45]: Takayama, *Sicily and the Mediterranean*, 171.

[^46]: Ibid.

[^47]: Ibid.*,* 172.

[^48]: Ibid.

[^49]: Ibid.

[^50]: Ibid.,173.

[^51]: Ibid.

[^52]: Ibid., 174.

[^53]: Ibid.

[^54]: Ibid., 175.

[^55]: Ibid.

[^56]: Reilly, *Invention of Norman Visual Culture*, 133.

[^57]: Ibid.

[^58]: Ibid., 119.

[^59]: Ibid., 117.

[^60]: Ibid., 125.

[^61]: Ibid., 130.

[^62]: Ibid., 134.

[^63]: Ibid., 148.

[^64]: Ibid., 163.

[^65]: Ibid., 164.

[^66]: Ibid.

[^67]: Ibid., 166.

[^68]: Ibid., 184.

[^69]: Ibid., 178.

[^70]: Ibid., 181.

[^71]: Ibid.

[^72]: Ibid., 182.

[^73]: Ibid., 179.
