---
title: "The Norman Rulers"
date: 2021-09-01T17:17:46+04:00
draft: false
noshowdate: true
noshowpager: true
---

When people think of Sicily, rarely do they ever think of it as the
heartland of a kingdom. Sicily is often seen merely as a part of Italy,
leading its rich, unique, and multicultural history to fall by the
wayside. Sicily was indeed the center for the formation of a Norman
kingdom and a multicultural heartland during the late 1000s into the
1100s. This kingdom would have a major role to play in the Crusades and
the many battles that took place within that time period. Most
importantly though, this kingdom would, through the works of its many
great rulers, go down as a state (avoid repetition of "kingdom") that
would change the course of Mediterranean and European history for
centuries to come. The rulers of the Norman kingdom of Sicily such as
Roger I, Roger II, King Tancred, and more all had an important role to
play in the politics of the world going on at that time. Beginning with
Tancred of Hauteville and his twelve sons, we will see how every
decision, every action, every step made by these figures led them to
create a kingdom that would rival that of France and the Byzantine
Empire. Also, the dynasty the great figures of Norman Sicily such as
Roger II created defined the direction of Sicilian history for years and
because of this it should be known that Sicily is not just a simple
footnote to history. At the end of this essay it is our hope that the
historical value of the Norman Kingdom of Sicily will be brought to
light and that its readers will have a new appreciation for the history
of Sicily and history in general.

## Tancred and His Sons
*by Richard DeVivo*

The conquests of Sicily at the hands of the Norman House of Hauteville
came to be through both scarcity and personal ambition. It was a family
of humble beginnings. According to tradition, the once minor House of
Hauteville traced back from the line of the Norseman Hiallt, who founded
the settlement of Hauteville on the Cotentin peninsula in Normandy. They
controlled very little land and held very little influence. When Tancred
de Hauteville came to power, he was but a petty lord. Due to this, very
little is known about him. What is known is that Tancred sired twelve
sons and many daughters between two wives.[^1] Tancred possessed little
else other than his meager territory and a large family hungry for more.
It was a situation bound to disappoint his many children looking to
inherit their father's holdings. Yet humble beginnings would propel the
House of Hauteville to greatness. Tancred's many younger sons knew that
they would receive little to nothing when it came to inheritance and
instead traveled to southern Italy to gain their fortune, lest they be
penniless and without glory. In accordance with Norman military
tradition and heritage, the sons of Tancred would make their way in the
world as soldiers of fortune for great powers and eventually become
conquerors of their own lands.[^2] The children of the House of
Hauteville ventured, fought, and struggled for their "inheritance."
Thus, Tancred's legacy is tied to the triumphs of his many ambitious
descendants.

## Robert Guiscard
*by Taelor Myrie*

In 1046, Robert Guiscard departed France, beginning his journey to
Southern Italy. The son of Tancred of Hauteville embarked on a journey
to Italy to seek what his father was unable to give to him: land, glory,
and riches. When mounting his horse in Normandy and setting his sights
on the Italian peninsula, Robert had no way of knowing that he would
later become the Duke of Apulia and Calabria, controlling the South of
Italy and eventually, Sicily. Prior to his arrival, his elder brother
William was named the first ever leader of Normans collectively in the
south of Italy, succeeded as Count of Apulia by his brother Drogo on the
event of his death.[^3] Drogo was prepared to treat his younger brother,
Robert, as a knight, but was unwilling to give him his own
territory.[^4] Guiscard became count of Apulia and Calabria in 1057 upon
the death of his younger brother Humphrey.[^5] His rule was marked by
many military battles, but the most notorious of his spats were the
frequent ones between him and the pope. In 1059, the Treaty of Melfi was
signed, with the Normans pledging their financial and military support
to the papacy and swearing an oath to not invade papal land in return
for recognition from the pope and Robert Guiscard being elevated from
the Count of Apulia and Calabria to the Duke of Apulia, Calabria, and
yet-to-be-conquered Sicily.[^6] There never came a moment when Robert
simply basked in the glory of his success; he was constantly entangled
in efforts to preserve his gains as well as to expand into new
territories. It is evident that while he took great pride in his
accomplishments, he was never fully satisfied. In May 1061, after his
spring campaign in Apulia, Melfi, and with the recapture of Brindisi and
Oria, he was able to send a large number of men to Sicily to aid his
brothers already ongoing battle against the Muslim population that
predated their arrival.[^7] Plagued by the Greek influence in a land he
tried so hard to eradicate, he didn\'t see his vision of a "Norman"
society come true. Greek settlements existed throughout Southern Italy
and Calabria. Their resistance to the duke's rule and leadership sparked
battles with droves of men besieging these areas until their rebellions
were crushed. Undertaking the pope's wishes to reclaim Sicily and
spending countless years squashing Lombard and Byzantine rebellions, his
rule remained strong. But he as an individual was spread thin. Guiscard
left the shores of Sicily in 1072 for the last time; he never returned
due to obligations and the challenges that he faced in mainland
Italy.[^8] The Duke of Apulia and Calabria was motivated and success
driven and had a thirst for territorial acquisition and power. His
legacy is that of a man who did what he pleased in the interest of power
consolidation and growth. He relied heavily on his brother and those he
trusted, and although a devout Catholic, he was not afraid to take on
the human representative of his God.

## Roger I
*by Taelor Myrie*

Roger I rose to prominence under Robert's wing and is best remembered
for the role he played in the expansion of his brother's duchy, his
ability to formulate and execute strategic plans, and his policy of
tolerance of people in conquered areas. Following in the footsteps of
his successful brothers William and Robert, a young Roger I began his
journey to Southern Italy in search of riches and power. Robert trusted
his younger brother and enlisted him to serve in military conquests,
waging war for the expansion and prosperity of the duchy. While his
early accomplishments are many, the most significant and documented
struggle he undertook was the thirty-year campaign to rid the island of
Sicily of its three Muslim leaders. While conflict between the Church
and the Normans was present throughout their longstanding history, it
was in the best interest for both of these entities to end Muslim rule
of the island. The Saracens and the Lombards assisted Roger in a
conquest that was brutal in execution, despite suffering numerous
setbacks.[^9] Their strategy included cornering the Muslims and burning
crops and buildings while they made their advancement on land. They were
playing the long game, waiting to attack in moments of vulnerability.
While overall successful, there would have been no need for efforts to
conquer Sicily to last 30 years had sufficient manpower been available
to Roger. His focus remained on Sicily whilst battles were erupting on
the mainland, drawing his focus to assist his brother for extended
periods of time. With his full attention, his cunning strategies, and a
larger force to execute his plans, the Muslim leaders likely would have
been defeated much sooner.

As count of Sicily, a title given to him by Robert Guiscard for his
involvement in reclaiming Sicily, Roger I understood the necessity for
order amongst his new subjects. Waging an expensive, deadly, and
time-consuming war for 30 years meant that substantial freedoms had to
be granted, knowing the Arabs, Berbers, and Byzantines could have
organized a revolt to reclaim power. Under his rule, Sicily needed
constant protection to keep newly-defeated enemies from rebelling. A
continuous presence necessary to protect the island effectively was paid
for by residents in the form of taxes. To mitigate thoughts of
resentment and keep the peace, Roger I allowed for the practice of
Easter Orthodoxy and Islam.[^10] Places of worship were maintained and
Roger I made his quest for knowledge and his fascination with cultures
evident. He allowed for the continuation of Muslim influence in law.
Arabic was an official language of the state (alongside Norman French
and Greek) and he kept regional emirs in their posts, maintaining the
presence of Islam in courts and preserving the practice/execution of
Islamic ideals and its customs in government.[^11] His rule of Sicily
can be characterized as accepting, tolerant, and it was evident he
wanted to foster an environment where people of all backgrounds could
exist comfortably. His intention was to create a society that was
blended, with people benefiting from each other. Whether these ideals
were upheld solely for the maintenance of a peaceful blended society and
were motivated by a love and admiration for other cultures is open to
debate. What is certain, though, is that Roger I left his mark on Sicily
and the duchy of which it was part, setting a precedent for an
integrated Southern Italian society.

## Roger II

### Introduction
*by Alicya Garrido*

In order to understand all that Roger II had accomplished under his
reign, one must understand how sources portray his effectiveness as a
ruler. From the decision to align himself with the anti-pope, to his
callousness for repressing those who opposed his authority, it is clear
that Roger II could be calculating and cruel. Nonetheless, many sources
present a different side by recording his ability to be magnanimous
towards those who submitted to his rule and offered him their loyalty.

To begin to understand the complexity of Roger II, it\'s imperative to
explore the land in which he established his authority. The new kingdom
that emerged was a polyglot one, embodying a mixture of different
peoples, cultures, and even religions.[^12] The southern mainland of
Italy was composed mostly of 'Lombards,' descendants of the German
invaders from the late sixth century. The Lombards of the southern
region were different from their northern counterparts, as they lived in
accordance with the traditional law codes of the early medieval kings
and established their own identity. Nonetheless, it was loyalty to the
Roman Church that cemented the two regions together. On the island of
Sicily, conquered by the Arabs in the ninth century, much of the
population had in the next two centuries converted to Islam, but there
remained a substantial Christian minority, especially in the north-east
of the island, which was for the most part graecophone and observed
rites of the Orthodox Church based in Constantinople, as did their Greek
counterparts on the mainland.[^13] Religious tolerance was also a
political strategy and Roger was tolerant of his non-Christian subjects.

The relationship between Roger II and the Church was often a difficult
one. Roger I had secured the important ability to appoint high-ranking
churchmen in Sicily. This was a power that would be disputed during
Roger II's reign. His relationship with the papacy became even more
complicated as the latter supported some of the king's enemies during a
period of papal schism. After the death of Pope Honorius II a split
within the college of cardinals led to a disputed papal election during
which two rival popes were chosen: Innocent II (the favorite of some of
the younger or more recently-appointed cardinals -- the majority of whom
were from outside of the Italian peninsula - led by the papal chancellor
Hamimeric) and Anacletus II (who was supported by the older cardinals
from the area around Rome as well as the south of the peninsula, many of
whom believed that Haimeric was attempting to hijack the election,
including most of the older and more experienced members of the college
as well as those from Lazio and southern Italy.[^14] Roger aligned
himself, and his state, with Anacletus. His decision helped foster a
volatile political context, creating two opposing camps in Europe.

\[*Continued by Robert Macaluso*\]

Throughout his reign, Roger worked to foster authority and legitimacy in
the eyes of his subjects as well as of those around him. One of the ways
he did this early on was through the selection of his first wife. He
decided to marry himself into Spain's Jiménez dynasty since the family
already had an established family line that was both influential and
powerful. Tying himself to the Alfonso VI's legacy would help give Roger
II the political legitimacy he needed in order to establish himself as a
prominent figure in both Mediterranean and western European politics.
Alfonso VI of León-Castile was a very powerful ruler and commanded
respect throughout Europe. Roger knew a marriage alliance with his
family could help give him the respect he needed in order for his
kingdom to be considered a serious player in European politics. This is
likely the prime motivation behind his marriage to Alfonso's daughter,
Elvira. Although the Hautevilles in Sicily appear to have no tangible
interest in Spain, they could benefit from aligning themselves with the
prestige of Alfonso and his predecessors.[^15] Another aspect of
Alfonso's rule that enticed Roger II to tie himself to Alfonso, besides
quelling those who Roger was an illegitimate ruler, was his dominance
over the Muslim rulers that were a threat to his reign. Since Roger had
been having tensions brewing with Muslim rulers himself, this provided
him with another reason to respect Alfonso, and it made Alfonso's legacy
all the more attractive to the Normans overall. Roger married Elvira
because her father had successfully subjected numerous Muslim rulers to
his rule while expanding his political reach across an entire region of
Europe.[^16] Roger II knew that he and his father wished for their
kingdom to be taken seriously throughout the known world. They also
wished for the opposition to their reign to be silenced one way or
another. But rather than violence, Roger II knew the less bloody and
more effective way to solve this problem was through tying the kingdom
to an established dynasty, which for him proved to be the Jiménez
dynasty.

\[*Continued by Richard DeVivo*\]

Roger II is described by scholars as a ruler between East and West,
likely because of how eclectic his court and administration was. There
is more to the man than just the multicultural court he kept. As the
first Norman ruler of Sicily born in Italy and not on the cold shores of
Normandy, he was brought up differently thanks to the efforts of his
mother. With the help of Greek, Arabic, and Latin tutors alike, Roger II
was well-versed in the various cultures of his kingdom and drew strength
from them. While still remaining a Norman at heart, he was able to
become a man between East and West. Situated between the Latin West, the
Byzantine East, and the Islamic South, Sicily was the crossroads of the
medieval world. Aware of this advantageous position, Roger II and his
administrators were able to use this to their benefit. Realizing he was
at a crossroads, he sought to adapt, or at the very least accommodate,
elements of all three cultures. Roger's hunger for power intertwined
with his awareness of the diversity of his new kingdom, allowing him and
his court to pilot the realm towards a brief yet prosperous age of
multiculturalism.[^17] By inheriting the land administration of the
Arabs of Sicily, importing bureaucrats and courtiers from the Byzantine
Empire, and bringing experts of various trades from Europe, Roger II was
able to assemble a court that promoted art, peace between Peoples of the
Book, a strong economy, and efficient bureaucracy all while still
retaining Norman military tradition.

Roger II filled his court with prominent figures like the famed
statesmen George of Antioch, a Syrian-born minister who aided Roger II
in both his court and in his conquests of northern Africa, eventually
holding the esteemed title Emir of Emirs. While he did give out
Muslim-inspired titles, he also kept prominent Muslim intellectuals at
court to help enhance his reign and run his kingdom. For a while,
Roger's inner bureaucracy was superficially Byzantine in nature and the
meat and bones of the administration was based on the ruling systems of
Islamic Fatimid Egypt.[^18] One such Muslim noble of note among the many
poets, scholars, architects, and even scientists within Roger's court
was Muhammad al-Idrisi, famed geographer and cartographer of the time.
He is credited with creating one of the most advanced medieval world
maps and descriptions of the world in his *Book of Roger*, which was
completed in 1154.[^19] Thanks to his multilingual and diverse
upbringing under both Greek and Arabic tutors, Roger II had an
appreciation for the fine arts and high culture his kingdom was now able
to produce in droves. The harmony of Arabic intellectualism, Byzantine
splendour and administration, and Latin piety is seen in the unique
cathedrals Roger ordered built as they are testaments to the cultural
mixing at work in Sicily. Each combined Arabic, Greek, and Norman
architectural design.[^20] While Roger II was described as being
avaricious when it came to money, he is rarely described as looking down
on the fine creations of his courtiers and subjects, regardless of their
background. Truly, Roger II presided over and helped foster a
multicultural golden age in the kingdom he and his ancestors built.

A kingdom\'s golden age often only lasts as long as the reign of its
strongest king, and Norman-controlled Sicily is no exception. While the
rulers after Roger II were able to uphold aspects of their progenitor's
reign, none were able to fully balance and pilot the diverse kingdom
through both peace and crisis as Roger II did. The rulers following him
were not able to maintain the string of successes, consolidation, and
territorial gain that Roger II did, with each of their reigns being
marked by some form of crisis or instability. While the reign of House
of Hauteville did not crash and burn quickly after Roger's death, the
kingdom was at its peak during his life. After reaching its cultural,
economic, and military high point, the kingdom and its rulers could only
decline in quality from Roger II, even if it was gradual and nonlinear.

\[*Continued by Alicya Garrido*\]

While Roger II did his best to establish a firm political foundation,
the kingdom's security was not assured. Roger II's son, William I, also
suppressed rebellions by his enemies and faced opposition from the
papacy. In the very beginning of his political life, William I met with
resistance as his father coronated him as Sicily's next king in 1151.
The action was taken without papal permission and was interpreted by
some to have infringed on the pope's authority.[^21] The papacy aligned
itself with German leaders and sought military support from them. In
exchange for military favors, German leaders fostered more favorable
alliances with the papacy even though Holy Roman Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa has no interest in going to war against the Sicilian kingdom.

Due to the many enemies his father exiled during his reign, William I
faced numerous threats. Exiled noblemen posed a significant problem and
in 1155-6 they -- along with the papacy, the Holy Roman Emperor and the
Byzantine Emperor - came close to removing the king from his
throne.[^22] Although the Byzantines proved worthy opponents, William I
demonstrated his military prowess and defeated Byzantine naval forces at
Brindisi in 1156. Perhaps the most noteworthy rebellion during his rule,
however, was led a few years later by Matthew Bonnello, a Sicilian
noble. Indeed, Matthew encouraged many of the barons of Sicily to reject
William I's authority and he assassinated Maio of Bari, the king's chief
minister, in 1160. Matthew was relentless in his efforts, but the
conspiracy to overthrow William ultimately failed.

\[*Continued by Richard DeVivo*\]

The reign of William II, posthumously known as William "The Good," was
characterized by seclusion, lackluster military ventures, diplomacy, and
a peace within Sicily after the chaotic reign of his father, William I.
Scholars believe that William II's nickname is not attributed to the
"good" he did as king, but rather to the fact that the troubles and
rebellion that plagued the Sicilian court during the reign of his father
ceased under his rule.[^23] The people were satisfied to have a kingdom
at peace, even if their king was not exceptional in character and
lacking in military triumphs. Had he been crowned at a more tumultuous
time, he may have made for a poor ruler. Instead, William the Good was
able to guide Sicily through a period of peace, a period that would not
last upon the accession of his successor, Tancred, due to a defining
mistake in his reign.

Characterized as a pleasure-loving recluse who rarely left his court in
Palermo, it is a surprise that William's reign was marked by both
ambitious and far reaching foreign policy. He and his court were able to
secure papal favor, leading to closer relations with the papacy. The
kingdom of Sicily was also secretly working with the Lombard league at
the time. All these powerful connections enabled William and his allies
to resist the military encroachment of Holy Roman Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa.[^24] William II also engaged in marriage alliances and pacts
with various European powers. William's courtiers attempted to secure a
Byzantine alliance through marriage to a princess, but this failed,
leading to further breakdown of foreign relations. William eventually
married Joan of England, the daughter of King Henry II. This cemented
William's high political standing. When the time came to end conflict
with the Germans and sign the Treaty of Venice in 1177, he sent a
delegation in his stead, once again not leaving the palace in
Palermo.[^25] Thanks to what could be described as overindulgence in
delegation, he was able to help secure peace with the Germans and accrue
prestige in the eyes of other powers. Unfortunately, however, it would
be a fruitless marriage that would define his historical legacy.

The military career of William II could be described as ambitious in
intent, but lackluster in its gains. William held on to the vestiges of
Norman ambition and military tradition and attempted to revive Norman
triumph, but he could not regain the African territories that his father
had lost. When the retaking of Africa failed, he redirected his energies
to Ayyubid Egypt, seeking to raid, pillage, and attack the supply lines
of Saladin, the powerful Sultan of Egypt and a major threat to the Latin
crusader states. This also did not end in success. When William's men
landed in Ayyubid-controlled Alexandria, Saladin's forces wheeled around
and arrived to meet them. Facing a severe disadvantage in both numbers
and positioning, the Normans fell back to the sea in disorder.[^26] But
the Norman led troops would not return home just yet.

Looking to salvage the voyage, William turned his force to the Byzantine
Empire, which was in a state of disarray. William saw initial success
amidst the confusion the empire was experiencing, taking Dyrrachium and
Thessalonika by siege, along with capturing several of the Ionian
islands. Sources suggest that the Sicilians conducted combined attacks
by utilizing their army and navy in joint operations to effectively
defeat and sack the towns and cities they assaulted. Using this initial
success to march on the capital of Constantinople, William's success was
swept away when his army was beset upon by the Byzantine imperial army
while on the march and smashed against the Strymon River. William sued
for peace and gave up all recently taken territories, leaving empty
handed. William planned to continue the fight against Saladin with the
crusaders but would be overshadowed by the actions of his genius naval
commander Margarito.[^27] Overall, William II had a lackluster military
career marked by defeat, but the spark of Norman ambition was present as
evidenced by his daring attacks on the Byzantines.

Despite being seen as a golden age of relative peace, William's reign is
marred by the succession crisis that he left in the wake of his death.
Despite establishing a strong political marriage with princess Joan of
England, their union produced no children. The only eligible male heir
to the throne was Henry, Prince of Capua, the youngest surviving son of
William I and brother to the king.[^28] When he died in 1172 there was a
clear succession crisis. There was another Hauteville who possessed a
legitimate claim to the throne, but she was tangled in both ominous
prophecy and political strings. This was Constance, posthumous daughter
of Roger II and his third wife. Despite becoming William the Good's
designated heir, she was confined to a monastery for most of her life as
it was predicted her marriage would destroy Sicily. This negative
reputation and superstition surrounding Constance was likely the result
of a combination of religious fervour, a male court, and the fear of
German rule in Sicily. While her marriage would not "destroy" Sicily,
her union with a German emperor would subsequently contribute to civil
war, the loss of Norman control over Sicily, and the absorption of the
House of Hauteville into the House of Hohenstaufen.[^29] William II
showed a lack of interest in annulling his fruitless marriage to Joan of
England, and showed even less interest in securing a stable passage of
power to a well-liked heir when he passed on. While his reign may have
been peaceful, the actions, or perhaps lack of steps he took to secure a
peaceful transition of power forever tarnish his mostly adequate rule.

\[*Continued by Robert Macaluso*\]

After the death of William II, who passed without producing an heir, the
kingdom experienced a period of great unrest. William's only surviving
legitimate relation was his aunt Constance, the daughter of Roger II,
and wife of Henry VI, the emperor of Germany at that time. However, the
idea of Constance succeeding after William II\'s death was not
acceptable to many Sicilians as they feared her husband's empire would
compromise the independent kingdom. The popular solution seemed to be
allowing Tancred, count of Lecce, son of Roger II's eldest son, to claim
the throne. Though born illegitimate, his military capability to
suppress those who opposed him only strengthened his political standing
and claim to the throne.

Tancred was the illegitimate son of Roger III, duke of Apulia, and
grandson of Roger II, king of Sicily. Years earlier, during the reign of
William II's father, William I, Tancred had joined an insurrection in
1155 in an attempt to seize the throne from his uncle; the attempt
failed and Tancred was imprisoned for five years. He was then released,
participated in another failed coup in 1161, and then went into exile.
Thirteen years later, William II forgave Tancred for his disloyalty and
put him in command of a Sicilian expedition fleet against Alexandria.
Near the end of his reign, William II, having no heirs, released his
aunt Constance from a monastery and approved her marriage to King Henry
VI of the Romans in order to prevent his cousin Tancred from becoming
King of Sicily after his death. Constance had the backing of the feudal
barons but the people and papacy supported Tancred's claim to the throne
of Sicily. Since Constance was unacceptable to many, the people of
Sicily asked themselves "who could be king?" Tancred, count of Lecce and
magister justiciarius, was the chief official of the mainland, known
both as a soldier and administrator. His one significant flaw was his
illegitimacy.[^30] Despite having sworn fealty to Constance, as soon as
William II died, Tancred rebelled and seized control of Sicily.
Constance and Henry VI were forced to retreat back to Germany where they
launched several attacks upon Sicily throughout Tancred's reign.

Tancred became the illegitimate king of Sicily and was crowned by
Archbishop Walter of Palermo in January 1190. Roger, count of Andria,
opposed Tancred's coronation and called upon the Germans who were still
in Sicily to help him oppose Tancred's kingship. Roger's call for
support fell upon deaf ears mostly and Tancred's ally, Richard, count of
Acerra, was rapidly able to shore up Tancred's authority in Apulia,
tracking down Roger of Andria and killing him. Eventually, the nobles of
Sicily began to realize that it was time to rally behind Tancred so that
they could be united against a German invasion. A German force which
invaded the kingdom from Rieti in May accomplished very little against
Tancred's forces. By June 1190, the commune of Naples was already
willing to accept Tancred's kingship. Other comparable groups may have
also realized that it was in their favor to unify behind the monarchy
rather than to continue to pursue their own specific agendas, a strategy
which would play into the Germans' hands.[^31] Tancred's reign was mired
by the ongoing conflict between him and his aunt, as well as Richard I
(the Lionheart) of England and Philip Augustus of France who traveled
through Sicily on their way to the Third Crusade, since William II had
planned to be a part of it. While passing through Sicily, Richard
demanded the release of his sister, William II's widow, Joan. Tancred
had Joan imprisoned after taking the throne and also had her dowry
stripped from her. Richard also demanded that Tancred stand by the
financial commitments his cousin William had made to the crusade. When
Tancred refused, Richard seized a monastery and the castle of La
Bagnara. Once King Philip II arrived in Sicily, civil unrest began to
grow to the point of a revolt against the foreign rulers in Messina to
which Richard responded by attacking Messina, capturing it and wintering
there. Due to this, Tancred was forced to sign a treaty with Richard in
March 1191 which included Richard's sister and her dowry being released
as well as Richard and Philip being required to recognize Tancred as the
rightful king of Sicily. Along with these two agreements, Tancred also
promised his daughter to Richard's nephew, Arthur of Brittany (Richard's
heir) when he became old enough to marry.\
After Richard and Philip left Sicily for the Holy Land, attention soon
reverted back to the conflict between Tancred and Constance, who in
April 1191 was crowned empress in Rome, as she was now married to Henry
VI. After being crowned emperor and empress by Pope Celestine III, Henry
and Constance quickly looked to reclaim the kingdom of Sicily. Their
first attempt proved somewhat successful until the imperial army
succumbed to malaria and disease, forcing Henry VI to withdraw from the
island. However, Henry VI had Constance stay in Salerno with a small
garrison which was intended as a message that he would return. After the
emperor fully withdrew, the towns he took over quickly redeclared their
allegiance to Tancred for fear of his retribution and Salerno delivered
Constance to Tancred in order to win his favor. Tancred had his aunt
locked up in Castel dell'Ovo in Naples and hoped to force Henry to
negotiate a peace for her safe return. However, Tancred gave her up in
exchange for Pope Celestine III legitimizing him as king of Sicily.
During Constance's trip to the papal states, Henry's soldiers were able
to rescue her and she was safely returned to her husband. After this
setback, Tancred regained the towns Henry had taken from him, quelled
rebellious Apulian barons in 1192 and 1193, and named his eldest son
Roger III, identifying him as the co-king of Sicily. Unfortunately, both
would not survive for long. Two months after the death of Roger III,
Tancred died on February 20, 1194 in Palermo. Tancred's only surviving
son, William III, was then crowned king.

William, however, was a mere child at this time. Therefore, his mother,
Sibylla of Acerra, established a regency until William III was old
enough to rule. It did not last long as Henry VI, who had been planning
his return to Sicily long before Tancred had died, was finally able to
reconquer the kingdom. Sibylla, fearing for her family's fate, accepted
Henry's offer that allowed William to retain the county of Lecce, the
home territory of his father, and he would also retain the principality
of Taranto. However, four days after Henry had been crowned king of
Sicily, he heard news of an alleged conspiracy, and so he arrested
anyone who could oppose his rule and sent them to Germany - William and
his family included. Though his mother and sisters were eventually
released and lived the rest of their days out in obscurity in France,
not much is known of William III's final fate. It is said that he had
been either blinded or castrated, or both. Other theories suggest he
died in captivity, he was released and became a monk or that he later
returned to Sicily under the alias of Tancredi Palamara who was executed
by Henry's son, Emperor Frederick II, in 1232. Despite all of these
theories, however, most historians refer to several letters by Pope
Celestine III that states William III died in the year 1198, which is
the generally accepted date.

\[*Continued by Richard DeVivo*\]

Norman conquest and eventual rule in southern Italy was defined through
cunning ambition, struggle, and adaptation. It was the ambition of
Tancred of Hauteville's many sons combined with the Norman spirit of
adventure that propelled the House of Hauteville from their modest
beginnings as wayward mercenaries to conquerors and, eventually, to
kings. Every generation and ruler contributed greatly to the cultivation
of power in the area in different ways. From the cold shores of
Normandy, the warriors Roger I and Robert Guiscard brought their
military cunning and desire for more prosperous lands. Born in Italy,
Roger II and his progeny represented a new breed of Norman rulers,
focused on the consolidation of power and wealth, whH embraced the
multicultural realm they presided over. Though Norman rule in Sicily
ended in turmoil, their cultural impact, advancement of the region, and
historical contribution can be felt till this day.

<hr>

[^1]: Hubert Houben, *Roger II of Sicily: A Ruler Between East and West*
    (Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 2002), 8-9.

[^2]: Ibid., 10.

[^3]: Norwich, *The Normans*, 69.

[^4]: Ibid., 75.

[^5]: Ibid., 107.

[^6]: Ibid., 127.

[^7]: Ibid., 142.

[^8]: Ibid., 189.

[^9]: Ibid., 184.

[^10]: Ibid., 190.

[^11]: Ibid., 191.

[^12]: G. A. Loud, *Roger II and the Creation of the Kingdom of Sicily*
    (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2017), 4.

[^13]: Ibid., 5.

[^14]: Ibid., 21.

[^15]: Dawn Marie Hayes, *Roger II of Sicily: Family, Faith, and Empire
    in the Medieval Mediterranean World* (Turnhout: Brepols, 2020), 42.

[^16]: Ibid., 35.

[^17]: Houben, *Roger II of Sicily,* 98-100.

[^18]: Ibid., 150.

[^19]: Ibid., 157.

[^20]: Ibid., 135-40.

[^21]: Loud, *Roger II.*

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Houben, *Roger II of Sicily*, 168.

[^24]: Ibid., 168-70.

[^25]: Ibid., 171.

[^26]: Ibid., 172.

[^27]: Ibid., 168.

[^28]: Ibid., 180.

[^29]: Ibid., 172-74.

[^30]: Donald Matthew, *The Norman Kingdom of Sicily* (Cambridge, Eng.
    and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 286.

[^31]: Ibid., 287.
