---
title: "The Worlds the Normans Found"
date: 2021-09-01T17:17:46+04:00
draft: false
noshowdate: true
noshowpager: true
---

*by Masud Ahmed, Fathia Balgahoom, Kenneth Gutierrez, and Jonathan
Hoffman*

Southern Italy in the centuries leading up to the Norman invasion was a
polarizing place. Throughout Southern Italy were a number of communities
with distinct identities. We are going to be taking a closer look at
three of the more important communities in Southern Italy in the time
leading up to the Norman conquest of the region. They are Lombards,
Byzantines, and Muslims, all of whom played a significant role in
shaping the Southern Italy that the Normans would invade and unify.

We will be looking at Southern Italy and its autonomous nature from 6th
century AD to when the Normans imposed their authority on the region at
the end of the 11th century. Many believed that this region was
underdeveloped and not being used, which just is not the case. In
Southern Italy after the invasion of the Lombards, power would be
divided by areas belonging to the Byzantine and the Southern Lombards.
The Muslim conquest of Sicily in the 9th century would have a large and
similar impact to the roles of the Byzantine and Lombards in shaping the
Italy that the Normans would go on to conquer.[^1]

## Lombard and Southern Sicily

The Lombards were a Germanic people who found a home in Southern Italy
by the 6th century. Their invasion of the region began in 568 and within
decades they established a strong kingdom in the territories north of
the River Po, Tuscany, and in the two duchies of Spoleto and Benevento.
The biggest rival to the Lombards in Southern Italy at the time of their
invasion was the Byzantines who already had a lot invested in the
region. There would be some tension between the two autonomous regions
but by 680 AD the Byzantine empire had concluded a treaty with the
Lombards, which seems to have involved a formal recognition of their
presence in the region.

Throughout the 8th and 9th centuries, the Lombards would keep their eyes
set on maintaining control of territory in Southern Italy. Internal
conflicts would pose a threat to their power and a civil war occurred in
the 9^th^ century between factions in Benevento and Salerno. The
conflict would go on to shape Southern Italy as it had a direct link to
an increase in the number of Muslims in the region during the 9th
century. Both sides employed Arab mercenaries and hired them to fight on
their side during the civil war. Word spread of work in southern Italy
because of the conflict and a rise in Arab population ensued. This was
one of the most significant consequences of the open hostilities.

Louis II, king of Italy and Holy Roman Emperor, took great interest in
the conflict because of its attraction to Arab mercenaries. He most
likely would have never paid any attention to this conflict otherwise.
In the year 849, Louis helped bring an end to the conflict by dividing
the Lombard duchy between the two sides while establishing some degree
of stability.[^2] The end of the conflict meant that Arab mercenaries
would no longer be in demand.

The end of civil war suggested a brighter future for the region. The
Byzantines had been losing interest in Southern Italy and the two
factions that were previously at war were satisfied. For a short period
of time, the Lombards were seemingly in control of most of southern
Italy. Unfortunately for the Lombards in Benevento, however, the
Byzantines had rediscovered interest in territories that had once
controlled in Southern Italy. From the end of the 9th century into the
10^th^ century, conflicts ensued and the Lombards began to lose
territory to the Byzantines.

By the early 10th century, Benevento would become Capua-Benevento and
would be ruled as a single entity. The newly formed unit of
Capua-Benevento found it difficult to resist the Byzantines. Salerno, on
the other hand, seemed to benefit from the conflict. As the Byzantines
were by their campaigns to regain their former territories in
Capua-Benevento, Salerno flourished. Interestingly, both Salerno and
Capua-Benevento managed to maintain stable governments throughout this
period, even if many elections were rigged to ensure that the Lombards
would retain power.

From the 6th century until the start of the 11th century, the Lombards
exercised significant power in Southern Italy and strongly influenced
the region the Normans would ultimately take over. Salerno was a town
that was well-bonded with traditional structures and it remained
prosperous during Southern Italy's feud with Emperor Otto I. The
Lombards had their own system of law; in fact, in Southern Italy it was
one of the two major legal systems -- the other being Roman Law. In
short, the lands the Lombards ruled were politically sound and
represented one of the strongest of the autonomous regions in Southern
Italy on the eve of the Normans' arrival.

The end of Lombard rule in Southern Italy signified the end of
autonomous rule in the region. By the 11th century, the Normans had
arrived and began taking over Southern Italy. When the Normans captured
the principality of Salerno, they brought an end to the last Lombard
stronghold and an end to area's autonomous regions.

## Byzantine Sicily and Southern Italy

Byzantium\'s grip on Italy grew stronger during the seventh, eighth, and
ninth centuries. The Byzantines had to restructure their control over
the remaining holdings in the Italian peninsula after the Lombard
invasion of the region. The years from 876-1000 were turbulent due to
succession problems and Muslim raids, which aggravated internal
divisions. This led to the fall of Byzantine Sicily as the island became
dominated by Muslim rulers with ties to North Africa. The chaos that
persisted in much of Italy culminated with the arrival of the Normans.
The effect of the Norman Conquest on Byzantine Italy resulted in its
separation from the Byzantine heartland. This led to the eventual
decline of Byzantine culture and influence in Italy.

By the end of the seventh century, the Byzantine regions of Italy had
been through an entire century of turmoil. Following the Lombard
invasions, the Byzantines militarized their remaining territories,
concentrating land in the military and handing it to the Exarch of
Ravenna and his dukes. This was accomplished at the local and regional
levels, with the final phase being the establishment of military
strongholds.[^3] With the inclusion of eastern clerics and artists
throughout the kingdom of Italy, rather than just in Rome, Byzantine
influence grew after the Lombards were formally recognized in 680. Eight
of the nine pontiffs who sat in St. Peter between 676 and 715 were
Greek, Syrian, or Sicilian. The emperor sought the assistance of the
pope because political and religious stability depended on it. Since
that meant imperial authority in Rome, Rome enjoyed further prestige
from this association. Resistance against the Lombards was successful
and was accomplished by placing power in the hands of local elites from
imperial garrison units. Threats from the Arabs, Bulgars, and Slavs
weakened the empire, making the role of the eastern exarch less
important. The conversion of the Lombards from barbarians to Romanized
Catholics weakened the loyalty given to the empire.[^4]

The Duchy of Naples included the Bay of Naples\' coasts and islands, as
well as the inland Terra di Lavoro and the towns of Sorrento, Amalfi,
and Gaeta. Its institutions followed the traditional Italian model, with
power and wealth concentrated in a military-based elite. Naples\'
allegiance to the empire was greater than that of the northern
provinces. The need for imperial help was due to its maritime relations
with the east and the need for imperial protection against the
ever-present threat of Lombard Benevento. The fall of Ravenna in 751 had
little impact on the duchy since it had fallen under the authority of
the *strategos* of the theme of Sicily. The Arab invasion of Sicily in
827 was the turning point in the detachment of Naples from the empire.
In 835, Duke Andrew employed Muslim mercenaries to battle Prince Sicard
of Benevento (833-839), and in 842 and 843, he assisted the Muslims in
capturing Messina from the empire. This alliance strengthened Naples,
allowing them to sign a crucial treaty with the Lombards in 836. Later,
in order to prevent attacks from Muslim strongholds such as Taranto, the
Neapolitans strengthened their relations with the Saracens. Byzantium\'s
cultural and economic presence was enormous, according to evidence, and
included imports of eastern pottery. Gaeta grew in importance as a
communication hub in the north. Gaeta occasionally operated
independently of Naples and was forced to change its policies toward
Muslims. To the south was the non-Roman city of Amalfi, which was
populated by Lombard refugees. It was a naval base by the eighth
century, and it was used in wars with the Lombards, Franks, and Arabs.
Following a raid by Prince Sicard of Benevento in 839, Amalfi gained
independence from Naples under its own leaders. Despite the fact that
the Greek aspect was not as strong as Naples\' and that its foreign
policy was independent of the empire, its trade relations with the east
became increasingly important.[^5]

Calabria was the name given to a late Roman civilian province that
bordered on the Terra d\'Otranto. The imperial territory faced a crisis
in the middle of the seventh century, with the civilian government
dispersing and breaking down as the Lombard dukes of Benevento seized
vast regions. This resulted in a late seventh-century institutional
reorganization. Due to immigration from Greece and Sicily, this time
marked a turning point in both areas\' Hellenization. From written
history, little is known about the duchy during this time period. The
position of the duchy became clearer only after Nikeophoros Phokas
conquered Lombard Calabria in 885-886.[^6]

In contrast to the upheaval evident in most Byzantine areas on the
Italian peninsula, Sicily occupied a more prominent position within the
imperial plans beginning in the seventh century. The island of Sicily
rose to prominence as a naval base for countering Muslim advances from
North Africa. In the early 690s, Justinian III turned it into a theme.
Its *strategos* came to rule over imperial territories in southern
Italy, and after the exarchal government fell in 751, he became a key
figure in negotiations with the Franks, Lombards, and the papacy. The
influx of officials and soldiers from the east quickened the
Hellenization process. Emperor Leo III was able to realize the island\'s
economic, political, and military importance. Sicily was one of the
regions that was transferred to the patriarchal authority of
Constantinople. Due to this, the Latin element disappeared and the
process of Hellenization was reinforced. Nonetheless, by the eighth
century, unrest was on the rise. One reason for this was the downturn in
the economy. The increasing number of Arab raids had a detrimental
impact on the island's prosperity.[^7]

Sicily, unlike its mainland counterparts such as Ravenna, Rome, and
Naples, lacked a central power base and an independent military elite.
As a result, the populace\'s response to the upheavals of the 820s was
varied and, in some respects, passive. A largely Arab army landed in the
western port of Mazara in June 827 and defeated the Byzantine
*strategos* Plato soon after. After defeating Palermo in 831, Cefalù in
857, and Enna in 859, the Arabs gradually expanded their influence over
the island. The critical misfortune occurred when the capital Syracuse
collapsed after a nine-month siege, and the city\'s population was
massacred.[^8]

Byzantium\'s status in Italy had shifted dramatically over two
centuries, from a precarious position in 680 to the verge of a new era
of power and influence in the late ninth century. Traditional imperial
rule only worked with the aid of a coherent Hellenization mechanism in
the theme of Sicily and associated duchies of Calabria and Otranto.
However, in every region, developments were shaped by the
decentralization that began in the seventh century, and distinguishing
practices and institutions that were more often Roman than strictly
Byzantine remained influential. The destruction caused by Arab raids, as
well as Frankish political and military failures, bolstered Byzantium\'s
status. The reconquest of most of the Lombard territory in Apulia,
Calabria, and Lucania, including Bari and Taranto, retaken in 876 and
880, began a new period of Byzantine dominance in southern Italy.[^9]

Around the year 900, there was a significant shift in terms of southern
Italy\'s security and independence from external powers. This transition
was brought about for three main reasons. The resurgence of Byzantine
influence in the late ninth century, under the governorship of
Nikephoros Phokas in the 880s, was the most notable. The Byzantines had
retaken most of northern Calabria and consolidated their control over
southern Apulia. The second reason was that the areas of southern Italy
not under Byzantium\'s rule were more stable. Third, following the Arab
capture of Taormina, the last major Byzantine stronghold in Sicily, in
902, Arab leader Ibrahim 'Abd-Allah died the same year, effectively
ending any Arab advance from Sicily. The system of southern Italy
remained largely in a state of equilibrium from 900 onwards. The main
problem for the Byzantine government in Calabria and Apulia following
915 was local disillusionment.[^10] While there was some back-and-forth
between the Byzantines and the Lombards, the Byzantines were able to
keep much of the territory they had reclaimed in the 880s. Unlike the
autonomous factions in southern Italy, Byzantium was the dominant power.
They had more pressing concerns in Asia Minor, so the protection of
their Italian possessions was left to the locals. Since neither the
Lombards nor the Byzantines were able to make permanent encroachments,
the south was mostly at a standstill.[^11]

Amalfi, Naples, and Gaeta, the three duchies off the west coast, were
quite different from the Lombard territories. These three duchies\'
economies were based on trade. Amalfi was the most affluent of the three
coastal cities in southern Italy. In the ninth and early tenth
centuries, they refrained from military confrontations with the Arabs
because trade was so important to them. In certain cases, they even
helped the Arabs. Due to their proximity to the Lombard territories,
these three territories were almost always under the patronage of the
Byzantine Empire.[^12] In the 980s and 990s, the Arab attacks resumed.
These Muslim raids reached all the way to Apulia. According to legend,
Prince Guiamar III welcomed a party of pilgrims from Normandy after this
series of raids. He allowed them to stay because he was impressed by
their military prowess, and this marked the beginning of the Norman
presence in southern Italy.[^13]

The Normans left much of the Byzantine infrastructure in place when they
first conquered southern Italy. The religious activities of Greek
churches were permitted to continue. In the territories, the Normans
encountered a Byzantine Italy with a combination of Latin and Byzantine
influences. The influx of newcomers from the north into Calabria and
Sicily had a major effect on southern Italy, as Hellenic influences were
gradually choked. The loss of relations between Byzantine Italy and the
Byzantine heartland harmed Byzantine culture. This occurred gradually
because the Normans didn\'t have a strategy of eradicating Byzantine
influence; rather, it happened as a result of their invasion.[^14]

## Islamic Sicily

After the prophet Muhammad passed away in 632, the Muslim *umma* began
their campaign to spread both the message of Islam and to conquer land.
By 731, the Arabs had successfully reached the Iberian Peninsula by
moving westward from Egypt through the Maghreb and conquering much of
the land. By this point, the Arabs controlled most, if not all of, North
Africa. Towards the beginning of the ninth century (third Islamic
century), all of the conquered lands had united and become one empire
underneath one universally accepted authority. While each land was still
ruled by its individual rulers, they had all agreed upon serving the
caliph and every major decision including war had to receive his
blessing before they entered or started a war. However, the Islamic
nation or *umma* was both politically and religiously divided with many
viewing the caliph in Baghdad as no longer the legitimate ruler.[^15]
This caused the *umma* to divide and separate based on their own inner
religious issues. Ultimately, this led to many of these territories
appointing their own caliphs and pledging allegiance to them instead of
the one in Baghdad.

## Leading Up to the Invasion

In the Middle Ages, during the 8th to 12th centuries, Sicily was viewed
as a coveted possession of Islam and was no stranger to invasions and
conquests. Its position in the Mediterranean Sea was seen as a strategic
one and it was sought after by many civilizations during the classical
period and the Middle Ages. During the ninth century, the Aghlabids (a
dynasty of Arab princes ruling the Ifriqiya province) had set their
sights on Sicily. During this time, the province ruled by the Aghlabids
faced a series of domestic problems including a violent
insurrection.[^16] While this insurrection was put down by the princes,
it created a feeling of residual resentment towards the royals among the
army factions. With this feeling of resentment growing, many took
advantage of it including the Berbers who felt as though there were
clear social and economic inequalities between the governors and the
governed.

In 827, Ziyat Allah had been contacted by Euphemius, a rogue admiral in
the Byzantine empire, who told him that Byzantine forces were holding
some Arab soldiers hostage. If this were true, it would break the peace
treaty the Aghlabids and Byzantines had signed together. The only catch
was that Ziyat Allah had to help Euphemius overthrow his enemies within
the Byzantine forces. When presented with this idea, he had to keep in
mind the host of domestic issues happening around it, especially the
feeling of resentment towards the elite in society. But he understood
that engaging in war with the Byzantines would help shift the focus away
from the slew of domestic problems he had going on. Ziyat Allah also
understood that Sicily would bring some exciting new prospects including
a renewed commercial success as well as military ventures. By invading
Sicily, it would give the army some work to do and keep them away from
the rebellion that was growing. Keeping all of this in mind, Ziyat Allah
decided to invade the island.

## The Invasion

Sicily was heavily guarded and considered a prized possession by its
current rulers, so it was understandable that the invasion met with
strong resistance. In fact, in the beginning, Muslim forces lost the
majority of the battles that they had fought in. However, when they did
enter battle, they were able to patch up lingering differences which led
to Constantinople sending reinforcements to help the Arabs invade
Sicily. Without these reinforcements, their conquest wouldn't have been
as successful as it was. In short, internal dissention in the Byzantine
Empire played an important role in the Arab conquest of Sicily.

During the invasion, there were definitely visible differences in both
independence and leadership within the armies. These differences would
lead to a strained relationship between the Muslims in Sicily versus the
ones in North Africa. Death was often common in these conquests and many
military leaders would die in battle. When these leaders died, the army
selected their successors, which the leaders in North Africa didn't
like. This practice became a point of contention between the two groups.
If a military leader was chosen and sent by the leaders in North Africa,
there was a chance that the new leader would be rejected, which speaks
to the growing independent thinking among the troops.

During the invasion of Sicily, the Muslim troops were able to capture
territories that were key to the Byzantine Empire, which led to their
ultimate victory. The first key city the Muslims were able to capture
was Palermo. The capture of Palermo led to the establishment of a Muslim
capital in Sicily and its vicinity to the ocean helped it gradually
develop into an urban center along with the other already established
Muslim centers. Another key city the Muslims were able to capture was
Castrogiovanni. This city was where Byzantine headquarters were located.
Once it had been captured, Muslim armies had pressed on eastward, a path
that eventually led to the downfall of Byzantine Sicily.

## Muslim Sicily

There was a growing divide between the Muslims living in Sicily and the
rulers in the Ifriqiyan province. Many groups tried to take advantage of
this, including the Fatimids. The Fatimids were a group of Shiites who
claimed to be descendants of Fatima and Ali. The Fatimids called for
economic, social, and religious reform and addressed concerns regarding
Aghalbid rule.[^17] Understanding the current political climate they
were in, they were able to use the Aghlabids' corruption and abuse of
power to their advantage and succeeded in stifling the Aghlabids' last
attempt at reform.

Once they were thrust into power, the Fatimids were able to maintain the
Aghalbid-Sicilian jihad conquest and used this to their advantage. They
were also able to manipulate the use of jihad in order to serve their
own interests. They were able to accomplish this in three ways. Since
the Fatimids were ruling a majority Sunni area, they were conscious
enough to give credit to the Sunni caliph whenever there was a Muslim
victory in Sicily.

They had also praised the Sicilian Muslims and promised to continue
supporting their campaign in Sicily. This made sure that they kept the
Sicilian Muslims happy, which allowed the Fatimids to stay in power.
Finally, they appealed to the Sicilians due to their anti-Aghlabid
campaign. By doing so, it allowed the Sicilian Muslims to see that the
Fatimids were the opposite of their previous rulers, which helped the
Fatimids establish a Shi'ite caliph. While their rule was not
illegitimate, it had an impact on Sicily's Muslim community, who in
response held elections to select their own rulers.

In 912, Sicilian Muslims did just that when they elected Ibn Qurhub as
their ruler. Ibn Qurhab was initially hesitant to accept the position to
rule and only did so when he received the full support of both the
Fatimids and the Aghlabids. During his rule, he raided Christian towns
and even created tensions between the Fatimids and the Aghlabids by
swearing allegiance to the caliph in Baghdad. This conflict resulted in
his death in 914.

During the Kalbid period in Sicily (948-1053), Muslims succeeded in
completing a jihad campaign and this provided some political and social
stability. During this period, there was evidence of a shift in focus
from a jihadist campaign to active support for culture and learning.
This is evident from the Sicilian works of Islamic jurisprudence which
helped confirm the island's connection to North Africa. There were also
works focusing on the Arabic language and its subfields, opening up the
possibility for language studies. It also led to the field of poetry
coming in at a rapid pace.

After this growth and stability came a decline with the rule of Jafar
Ibn Yusuf in 1014. During his rule, his own brother rebelled with the
help of slaves and Berbers, which led to the expulsion of all Berbers
from the island. There were rumors of misconduct surrounding Ibn Yusuf
and, seeing the chaos that ensued during this rule, the Zirid princes
decided that it was an opportunity to rip control away from the
Fatimids.[^18] Under their rule, Sicily was able to thrive once again.
The Zirid princes helped bring military and political prestige both in
Sicily and their own court. They also allowed for co-existence and
interdependence between the province and the motherland which was not an
option with other rules. By ruling Sicily, they were also given ample
opportunity of wealth in terms of both land and resources it provided.
It also opened up new trading avenues and routes to gain more capital.

## Final Days of Arab Sicily

The Arabs contributed much to the formation of Sicily and, thanks to
them, Sicily became powerful in that era. The Arabs came to Sicily and,
in the beginning, there was a great deal of prosperity and a relatively
peaceful coexistence with other religions and ethnic groups. The Normans
initiated campaigns of destabilization and took advantage of political
fissures that had appeared in the Muslim world. These strategies had a
destabilizing effect and enabled them to conquer the island during
thirty years of brutal campaigns.

The Arabs brought their innovations and knowledge to Sicily and it
shaped it to be a prosperous peaceful era. The island of Sicily was
fully conquered by Arabs in the 9^th^century and, with the notable
exception of the Orthodox Christian population in the northeast of the
island, many Sicilians converted to Islam. Just like the Moors - the
Arabs who conquered Spain - they brought an intellectual tradition to
Sicily.

Sicily under the Arabs witnessed a growing influence of Islamic culture
that emanated from Qayrawān (a town in modern-day Tunisia). The Arabs
who became the majority in Sicily wanted to expand their religion into
the people and their government. Their control of seaports was critical
to communication and trade. They played a vital role in Sicily's
economic prosperity.

The division and resentments between Christians and the Muslim
authorities would resume. First the Byzantines failed many times to take
back Sicily with many Arab military victories over them. Ultimately,
however, the Christians again became the majority and the Muslims
community declined. The hostilities with the Byzantine Empire were
costly and this helps explain why the island was able to be conquered
again in the eleventh century, this time by western European Christians.

The Arab Muslims who ruled Sicily for two centuries would lose control
of the island to a group of warlords from Normandy. The Normans were
skilled soldiers who were Christians and they would promote the spread
of their religion while taking control of the trade routes and
communications that had been under Muslim control. As the Normans came
to dominate the island, however, an Arabic-speaking Muslim population
would continue to exist on the island until 1220, when Emperor Frederick
II exiled them to a colony at Lucera, located on the mainland in what
today is Puglia.

## Conclusion

Each of the three societies discussed in this essay had a significant
impact on Sicily and Southern Italy well before the Normans' arrival.
The Lombards were able to create a stronghold on the island and were
also able to overcome a civil war that, at least temporarily, resulted
in a larger Arab population in the region. The Lombards also enabled
certain areas under their control to flourish. The Byzantines, on the
other hand, had a huge impact Sicilian culture, which should not
surprise us since they ruled the area for a long period of time. One of
the most important relationships created at this time was the one
between the Byzantine Empire and the papacy. This relationship helped
the Byzantines with the invasions from other empires while the pope was
able to gain greater influence. The Byzantines also militarized their
territories - including Sicily - creating a much stronger island. The
Arabs, too, left an important legacy to Sicily by bringing with them,
among other things, a rich cultural and intellectual heritage - a
tradition that included art, architecture, poetry, language and even
farming techniques. the Muslim population but also growing poetry and
language studies at a rapid pace.

To conclude, when the Normans arrived in Sicily and Southern Italy, they
were fortunate to be able to draw on the experience and knowledge of
accomplished societies that had come before them as they created a new
state in a diverse, multicultural landscape.

<hr>

[^1]: Thomas S. Brown, "Byzantine Italy (680-876)," in *The Cambridge
    History of the Byzantine Empire C.500-1492*, ed. Johnathan Shepard,
    433--64 (Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 2008).

[^2]: Barbara M. Kreutz, *Before the Normans: Southern Italy in the
    Ninth and Tenth Centuries* (Philadelphia, PA: University of
    Pennsylvania Press, 1996).

[^3]: Brown, "Byzantine Italy," 433.

[^4]: Ibid., 436-37.

[^5]: Ibid., 457-59.

[^6]: Ibid., 459-60.

[^7]: Ibid., 460-62.

[^8]: Ibid., 462.

[^9]: Ibid., 463-64.

[^10]: Graham A. Loud, "Byzantium and Southern Italy (876-1000)," in
    *The Cambridge History of the Byzantine Empire c.500-1492*,
    (Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 2009): 560-63.

[^11]: Ibid., 564-66.

[^12]: Ibid., 577-79.

[^13]: Ibid.," 581-82.

[^14]: Graham A. Loud, \"Byzantine Italy and the Normans,\"
    *Byzantinische Forschungen* 13 (1988): 215-33.

[^15]: William Granara, *Narrating Muslim Sicily: War and Peace in the
    Medieval Mediterranean World* (London: I. B. Tauris, 2019), pp. 4-5.

[^16]: Ibid., p. 5.

[^17]: Ibid., p. 15.

[^18]: Ibid., p. 30.
